RFD - Automatic Azure Server Discovery (#16957)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/xxxx-automatic-azure-server-discovery.md

---
authors: Andrew Burke (andrew.burke@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

> 

Reviewer: Who are the required reviewers for this RFD?

# RFD X - Automatic discovery of Azure servers

## What

> Teleport SSH services will be able to automatically discover Azure virtual machine

Reviewer 2: From what I understood what will discover is the Discovery service and not the SSH.

instances. See [RFD 57](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0057-automatic-aws-server-discovery.md)
(Automatic discovery and enrollment of AWS servers) for the same feature implemented
for AWS.

> Note: unlike RFD 57, this RFD covers discovery only. Azure node joining will be added

Reviewer 2: What happens once Discovery finds a new server? Ignores it or will the RFD include the joining as well before implementing it?

later.

## Why

> RFD 57 replaced the process of manually installing Teleport on EC2 servers, which
> could be slow for large numbers of instances. This RFD replaces the process on Azure
> as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RFD 57 replaced the process of manually installing Teleport on EC2 servers, which
could be slow for large numbers of instances. This RFD adds discovery of Azure instances.
The installation of Teleport on these servers is left to a future RFD.
```

## Discovery

Azure discovery will be handled by the new [discovery service](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0057-automatic-aws-server-discovery.md#discovery) described in RFD 57.

```yaml
discovery_service:
  enabled: "yes"

>   azure:

Reviewer 3: Is it legal to specify both `azure` and `aws` in the config for a single discovery service, or must you pick only one?

Reviewer 2: The AKS and EKS discovery already uses both at the same time but the service must have authentication credentials for both.

    - types: ["vm"]
      regions: ["westcentralus"]
      tags:
        "teleport": "yes"
```

> The Teleport SSH service will need a [service principal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/create-an-azure-service-principal-azure-cli?view=azure-cli-latest) with a role that includes the `Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines/read`

Reviewer 2: Discovery service

permission to list virtual machines via the Go Azure SDK.

> As with AWS database discover and EC2 discover, new Azure nodes will be discovered

Reviewer 2: How do you plan to add them? 
Currently, EC2 works with SSM, and nodes are only added to the cluster once they register themselves (after discovery service calls SSM to install Teleport on them).

Author: I imagine it will be mostly the same Azure-equivalent process, but I think those details would fit better in the eventual registration RFD.

> periodically on a 60 second timer, as new nodes are found they will be added to the

Reviewer 3: I'm curious how we settled on 60 seconds here. Databases and desktops use a 5m discovery interval, for example.

Reviewer 4: @zmb3 As every hardcoded timeout whatever value we pick there will be always questions why x not y. Is there any reason to not include the timeout in the config so it can be changed and use 5 min as a default?

Reviewer 3: This is not a timeout, but an interval for periodic operations. We mostly just use hard-coded constants for those. 

I don't feel strongly either way, 1m just feels pretty frequent for something like this.

teleport cluster.

In order to avoid attempting to reinstall Teleport on top of an instance where it is
already present, the generated Teleport config will match against the node name using
the Azure subscription ID and the virtual machine ID.

```json
{
  "kind": "node",
  "version": "v2",
  "metadata": {

>     "name": "${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}-${VM_ID}",

Reviewer 2: Can we leave this up to the user? 
If they want custom names we can check if they have a tag `teleport.dev/instance_name: {name}` like it's being done with AKS and Database discovery.

Adding a UUID to the name is quite difficult to follow and work with.

    "labels": {
      "env": "example",

>       "teleport.dev/discovered-node": "yes"

Reviewer: Should we identify which discovery service was responsible for discovering it ?

Reviewer 2: Missing origin label

>       "teleport.dev/discovered-node": "yes"

Reviewer 2: Will you import VM labels into Teleport as well?
If yes, append the region and subID as well

Author: Yes, Teleport already imports Azure labels automatically.

    }
  },
  "spec": {
    "public_addr": "...",
    "hostname": "azurexyz"
  }
}
```

## UX

### User has 1 account to discover servers on

#### Teleport config

> Discovery server:

Reviewer: Does this discovery only work if the discovery service is running within the same management group as the resources to be discovered?

Author: No. As long as it can see the resources to be discovered, the discovery service can be running anywhere.

permission to list virtual machines via the Go Azure SDK.

As with AWS database discover and EC2 discover, new Azure nodes will be discovered
periodically on a 60 second timer, as new nodes are found they will be added to the
teleport cluster.

In order to avoid attempting to reinstall Teleport on top of an instance where it is
already present, the generated Teleport config will match against the node name using
the Azure subscription ID and the virtual machine ID.

```json
{
  "kind": "node",
  "version": "v2",
  "metadata": {
    "name": "${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}-${VM_ID}",
    "labels": {
      "env": "example",
      "teleport.dev/discovered-node": "yes",
      "teleport.dev/discovered-by": "${DISCOVER_NODE_UUID}",
      "teleport.dev/origin": "cloud",
      "teleport.dev/region": "westcentralus",
      "teleport.dev/subscriptionId": "88888888-8888-8888-8888-888888888888"
    }
  },
  "spec": {
    "public_addr": "...",
    "hostname": "azurexyz"
  }
}
```

> Alternatively, ff the instance has the tag `teleport.dev/instance_name` present, the tag

Reviewer 4: ff? Fast Forward?

value will override the node name.

```json
{
  "kind": "node",
  "version": "v2",
  "metadata": {
    "name": "custom_node_name",
    "labels": {
      "teleport.dev/discovered-node": "yes",
      "teleport.dev/discovered-by": "${DISCOVER_NODE_UUID}",
      "teleport.dev/origin": "cloud",
      "teleport.dev/instance_name": "custom_node_name",
      "teleport.dev/region": "westcentralus",
      "teleport.dev/subscriptionId": "88888888-8888-8888-8888-888888888888"
    }
  },
  "spec": {
    "public_addr": "...",
    "hostname": "azurexyz"
  }
}
```

### Joining

Until joining is implemented, the discovery service will simply log the presence of
discovered servers.

## UX

### User has 1 account to discover servers on

#### Teleport config

Discovery server:
```yaml
teleport:
  ...
auth_service:
  enabled: "yes"
discovery_service:
  enabled: "yes"
  azure:

>     - types: ["vm"]

Reviewer 2: Include all fields defined in [AzureMatcher ](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/09773205f7fd96541e5d98ef0d2a790a8317a84e/lib/config/fileconf.go#L1357)
This is just to avoid confusion if anyone reads the RFD and doesn't see all the fields supported in the example.

      regions: ["westcentralus"]
      tags:
        "teleport": "yes"
```

> The discovery node's service principal should have permission to list virtual machines:

Reviewer 4: Is that the only permission that we need for discovery?

Author: It should be. All the discovery service needs to be able to do is get a list of virtual machines.

    "hostname": "azurexyz"
  }
}
```

### Agent installation

In order to install the Teleport agent on Azure virtual machines, Teleport will serve an
install script at `/webapi/scripts/{installer-resource-name}`. Installer scripts will
be editable as a resource.

Example resource script:
```yaml
kind: installer
metadata:
  name: "installer" # default value
spec:
  # shell script that will be downloaded and run by the virtual machine
  script: |
    #!/bin/sh
    curl https://.../teleport-pubkey.asc ...
    echo "deb [signed-by=... stable main" | tee ... > /dev/null
    apt-get update
    apt-get install teleport
    teleport node configure --auth-agent=...
  # Any resource in Teleport can automatically expire.
  expires: 0001-01-01T00:00:00Z
```

Unless overridden by a user, a default teleport installer command will be
generated that is appropriate for the current running version and operating
system initially supporting DEB and RPM based distros that Teleport already
provides packages for.

To run commands, the agent's service principal will require the
`Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines/runCommand/action` permission.

#### Action vs Managed run commands

> Azure virtual machines can run scripts via either [Action Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command)

Author: I haven't found an SSM equivalent in Azure. We'll have to send the commands in the `RunCommand` payload, same as AKS. I also haven't found a way to limit what commands can be run; the run command permissions seem to be all-or-nothing.

> Azure virtual machines can run scripts via either [Action Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command)

Reviewer 2: From the docs [here](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/azure/azure-sdk-for-go/services/compute/mgmt/2017-12-01/compute#RunCommandInput) I would say it should be possible - the command ID allows you to reference existing commands. The commands a user can invoke can be limited with `?scope?` field (I guess).

How to create and manage them is unknown to me

> Azure virtual machines can run scripts via either [Action Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command)

Author: [Command ID is actually for specifying Azure built-in commands, not for referencing existing commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command#available-commands). For any custom script, its value will always be `RunShellScript`.

> Azure virtual machines can run scripts via either [Action Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command)

Reviewer 2: Gosh, it's even worst than I imagined.
Let's write that down and mention that it is impossible to control at the IAM level what can be executed by the Teleport identity. Add it to the security section

Managed Run Commands have a few advantages over Action Run Commands, including:

- Cancelable scripts
- Finer control over timeouts
- Progress reporting
- Custom command IDs (this could make run commands more like SSM in AWS)

Azure recommends Managed Run Commands for non-trivial installation,
but they are still in Preview, so Teleport will use Action Run Commands. We
may consider switching to Managed Run Commands when they are fully released.

### teleport.yaml generation

The `teleport node configure` subcommand will be used to generate a
new /etc/teleport.yaml file:
```sh
teleport node configure
    --auth-server=auth-server.example.com [auth server that is being connected to]
    --token="$1" # passed via parameter from run-command
    --labels="teleport.dev/subscriptionId=${SUBSCRIPTION},teleport.dev/resource-group=${RESOURCE_GROUP},teleport.dev/region=${REGION}" # sourced from instance metadata
```

This will generate a file with the following contents:
```yaml
teleport:
  nodename: "${SUBSCRIPTION}-${VM_ID}"
  auth_servers:
    - "auth-server.example.com:3025"
  join_params:
    token_name: token
  # ...
ssh_service:
  enabled: "yes"

>   labels:

Reviewer: Should the discovery labels be included here e.g `teleport.dev/discovered-by` or are these injected elsewhere ?

permission to list virtual machines via the Go Azure SDK.

New Azure nodes will be discovered periodically on a 5 minute timer, as new
nodes are found they will be added to the teleport cluster.

In order to avoid attempting to reinstall Teleport on top of an instance where it is
already present, the generated Teleport config will match against the node name using
the Azure subscription ID and the virtual machine ID by default. This can be overridden
by specifying a node name in the join params.

```json
{
  "kind": "node",
  "version": "v2",
  "metadata": {
    "name": "${SUBSCRIPTION}-${VM_ID}",
    "labels": {
      "env": "example",
      "teleport.dev/discovered-node": "yes",
      "teleport.dev/discovered-by": "${DISCOVER_NODE_UUID}",
      "teleport.dev/origin": "cloud",
      "teleport.dev/region": "westcentralus",
      "teleport.dev/subscriptionId": "88888888-8888-8888-8888-888888888888"
    }
  },
  "spec": {
    "public_addr": "...",
    "hostname": "azurexyz"
  }
}
```

### Agent installation

In order to install the Teleport agent on Azure virtual machines, Teleport will serve an

> install script at `/webapi/scripts/{installer-resource-name}`. Installer scripts will

Reviewer 5: Is this going to use the same default installer script as AWS discovery?

Author: I made a separate one while testing, but there's no reason we couldn't have one default installer that handles both.

be editable as a resource.

Example resource script:
```yaml
kind: installer
metadata:
  name: "installer" # default value
spec:
  # shell script that will be downloaded and run by the virtual machine
  script: |
    #!/bin/sh
    curl https://.../teleport-pubkey.asc ...
    echo "deb [signed-by=... stable main" | tee ... > /dev/null
    apt-get update
    apt-get install teleport
    teleport node configure --auth-agent=... --join-method=azure --token-name=azure-token
  # Any resource in Teleport can automatically expire.
  expires: 0001-01-01T00:00:00Z
```

Unless overridden by a user, a default teleport installer command will be
generated that is appropriate for the current running version and operating
system initially supporting DEB and RPM based distros that Teleport already
provides packages for.

To run commands, the agent's service principal will require the
`Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines/runCommand/action` permission.

#### Join method

> Azure auto discovery will use the [Azure join method](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/19172)
> once it's implemented.

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
Azure auto-discovery will use the [Azure join method](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/19172).
```
Can you also link the RFD here?

> #### Action vs Managed run commands

Reviewer 4: I think we've already decided which we are using.

Azure virtual machines can run scripts via either [Action Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command)
or [Managed Run Commands](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/linux/run-command-managed).
Managed Run Commands have a few advantages over Action Run Commands, including:

- Cancelable scripts
- Finer control over timeouts
- Progress reporting
- Custom command IDs (this could make run commands more like SSM in AWS)

Azure recommends Managed Run Commands for non-trivial installation,
but they are still in Preview, so Teleport will use Action Run Commands. We

> may consider switching to Managed Run Commands when they are fully released.

Reviewer 5: Can you give an example command Teleport will execute on VMs using this API, incl. parameters?

### teleport.yaml generation

The `teleport node configure` subcommand will be used to generate a
new /etc/teleport.yaml file:
```sh
teleport node configure
    --auth-server=auth-server.example.com [auth server that is being connected to]

>     --token="$1" # passed via parameter from run-command

Reviewer 5: Nit: I would clarify here again that this is not the static/dynamic token value but the name of the Azure IAM join token.

    --labels="teleport.dev/subscriptionId=${SUBSCRIPTION},\
    teleport.dev/resource-group=${RESOURCE_GROUP},\
    teleport.dev/region=${REGION},\
    teleport.dev/discovered-node=yes,\
    teleport.dev/discovered-by=$2,\

>     teleport.dev/origin=cloud" # sourced from instance metadata

Reviewer 5: Use `teleport.internal/` here.

```

This will generate a file with the following contents:
```yaml
teleport:

>   nodename: "${SUBSCRIPTION}-${VM_ID}"

Reviewer 5: Is this actually parameterized/templated somehow or are you using ${} syntax just to indicate that this will use sub/VM IDs?

Author: Just to indicate those values. I've changed the syntax to make that clearer.

  auth_servers:
    - "auth-server.example.com:3025"
  join_params:
    token_name: token
  # ...
ssh_service:
  enabled: "yes"
  labels:
    teleport.dev/subscriptionId: "${SUBSCRIPTION}"
    teleport.dev/resource-group: "${RESOURCE_GROUP}"

>     teleport.dev/region: "${REGION}"

Reviewer 5: `teleport.internal/`
